mind your decisions I'm a presto Walker
the sum of X Y & Z is 1 the sum of their
squares is 2 and the sum of their cubes
is 3 what is the sum of their fifth
powers
I think Daniel in England for suggesting
this problem it was shared on social
media with such claims like solve if you
are a genius and 99 percent can't solve
this these titles turn some people off
but mind your decisions has been a
pioneer in solving such problems in
spite of some unfair criticism these
videos have received huge praise because
they share mathematical topics with
people who otherwise never would have
studied it consider this very problem
the variation of the sum of the fourth
powers is asked in a university math
textbook abstract algebra by dumb it and
foot these problems actually relate to
higher level mathematics you could solve
the some of the fourth powers and the
some of the fifth powers using high
school algebra and clever tricks it's
not easy but it is possible in this
video I'm going to show you a systematic
approach to solving these problems and
it will involve a little bit of build up
because we're going to study some
university level mathematical topics but
I think it will be worth it pause the
video if you'd like to give these
problems a try and when you're ready
keep watching to learn how to solve
these problems
we'll get started with the numerical
approach if we input these equations
into Wolfram Alpha will get approximate
values for X Y and C we can substitute
that in to get an approximate value for
the sum of the fifth powers it appears
to be a complex number but we might just
take a guess that this is a real number
and it's equal to 6 in fact this is the
actual answer which will prove later in
the video but there's something
interesting when you take a numerical
approach you get more than one solution
set of XY and Z you actually get six
different solution sets by permuting the
values for x y and z in total there will
be three factorial which equals six
solution sets the reason for the
symmetry is we're dealing with symmetric
polynomials a symmetric polynomial is
one in which it's unchanged for any
permutation of the variable subscripts
if we exchange one in two we would have
to get exactly the same polynomial if we
do a more complicated permutation we
would also have to get exactly the same
polynomial in general this polynomial
has to be the same for any permutation
Sigma of the variable subscripts so
let's take a look at a concrete example
consider the polynomial X 1 plus X 2
it's unchanged for the identity
permutation which does nothing and it's
also unchanged for the other permutation
that transposes 1 and 2 these two
polynomials are always equal to each
other and therefore X 1 plus X 2 is a
symmetric polynomial on the other hand X
1 minus X 2 is not symmetric
while it's unchanged for the identity
permutation it is changed if we
transpose 1 and 2 in general X 1 minus X
2 is not equal to X 2 minus X 1 this is
not a symmetric polynomial but we can
modify this to get a symmetric
polynomial imagine we square the
polynomial this will be a symmetric
polynomial
I'll mention what we're doing is an
example of group theory which is the
study of such symmetries I briefly
introduced group theory in my video
multiplied by lines group theory I
showed that you could take the tall
Walker Square diagram for an arithmetic
problem and then exploit the symmetries
of the square to solve new arithmetic
problems so how does that relate to our
original problem well these are a system
of power some symmetric polynomials or
power some polynomials for short each of
these is a different power some
polynomial and the degree refers to the
exponent of the variables let me just
put this in a little bit more formal
notation the cait degree power some
polynomial for n variables will be the
sum of the variables to the K power so
we'll translate our equations into power
some polynomial notation we want to
solve for P 5 now since we know we're
dealing with three variables we'll just
abbreviate this by removing the x y&z so
how can we solve for the value P five to
do that we'll need to study the
elementary symmetric polynomials these
are the building blocks for all
symmetric polynomials so let me just
show you the formal definition and then
I'll give you some intuition EK will be
the sum of all terms where each term is
a product of taking K variables at a
time and if we have more than n so Ivar
for R greater than n it'll be equal to
zero in our problem we have three
variables XY and Z these are the
elementary symmetric polynomials since
we're dealing with XY and Z I'll just
abbreviate this and now we're going to
take these elementary symmetric
polynomials and relate it to the power
sums to do that we'll start all over
consider a polynomial of degree n as
follows it'll be in the variable T this
will have n roots over the complex
numbers and we'll label them as X 1 to
xn some of the roots may be equal to
each other but that doesn't matter it
will have a total of n roots therefore
we can factor the polynomial as follows
it will be the product of these
linear terms we can now compare these
two versions of the polynomial so what
happens when we expand this polynomial
well the leading term will be T to the
power of n we then have negative II 1
multiplied by T to the power of n minus
1 the coefficient on the second term
will be negative the sum of the roots
and that's something you might have
learned in school but this is where it
comes from now the next term will also
have a coefficient that's an elementary
symmetric polynomial and this will
actually continue in an alternating sum
now what can we do here we'll make some
substitutions suppose we have f of X 1 1
the first equation we know that this
factor will cancel out to be 0 because X
1 is a root therefore we know this is
equal to 0 but we can substitute it into
our second equation and we'll get the
following expression we can do this for
all of the N roots on the one hand it'll
be equal to 0 and on the other hand
we'll get an expression so when we do
that we get a system of n equations and
we can do something interesting we can
sum these equations together the
left-hand side will be equal to 0 now
what happens on the right hand side will
some column by column the first column
will be the sum of these n variables to
the nth power in other words this is PN
it's a power some polynomial as the
leading term this pattern will continue
for the rest of these sums we're going
to get power some polynomials all the
way until the very end where we get n
times negative 1 to the power of n en
now this formula right here is
interesting it relates the elementary
symmetric polynomials to the other
polynomials and the power sums now
technically we derived this for en in n
variables but this formula actually
doesn't depend on the number of
variables and I'm going to present it in
another way which will be useful to
solve our problem so these are often
called the Newton identities but they
were discovered in 1629 by albert gerard
and then it was
later discovered by Newton in 1666 some
people call them the Newton Gerar
identities but at mind your decisions we
respect a mathematical history
and believe it would be more correct to
call them the girar Newton identities so
here are the identities k x e k is equal
to e k minus 1 multiplied by p 1 minus e
k minus 2 multiplied by p 2 plus so on
in an alternating sum all the way to
negative 1 raised to the power of k
minus 1 e 0 x PK this is what the
formula looks like in Sigma notation so
here are some tricks to remember this
formula it starts out with ek minus 1
multiplied by P 1 this will always be
true we then have an alternating sum and
finally each term will have the
following form the elementary symmetric
polynomials will decrease while the
power some polynomials will increase and
the sum of the indices will always be
equal to K in each of these terms and
that goes all the way to the very end so
we'll use these identities to solve our
problem to recall these are the
elementary symmetric polynomials related
to XY and Z and these are the powers
some polynomials that we were given and
the values of them so we'll get started
that p1 equals 1 and that's exactly one
therefore e 1 is equal to 1 now let's
solve for e 2 2 multiplied by e 2 equals
e 1 P 1 minus e 0 P 2 we have the values
for all of these except e 2 so we'll
substitute in and simplify and we can
solve the e 2 is equal to negative 0.5
we now will solve for e 3 3 multiplied
by e 3 will be equal to e 2 P 1 minus e
1 P 2 plus e 0 P 3
we substitute in the values we've
derived and the only thing that remains
will be three times III will be equal to
0.5 therefore III equals 1 over 6
now consider four times efore this will
be equal to e 3 P 1 minus e 2 P 2 plus e
1 P 3 minus e0 p 4 what is e 4 well 4 is
greater than 3 so the elementary
symmetric polynomial will be equal to 0
this term will vanish we then substitute
in values for the things we've already
derived the only unknown in this
equation is P far and we have a linear
equation which we can solve for P 4 it
equals 25 over 6 and recall P 4 is the
power some polynomial the sum of the
fourth powers so this is one part of the
problem we've already solved just by
going through this formula now let's
look at five times a 5 it'll be the
following expression and E of 5 and E of
4 will be equal to 0 because 5 & 4 are
greater than 3 so these terms will
vanish we then substitute in values
we've derived and the only unknown is P
5 we'll solve for P 5 and we get the
value of 6 and that's the answer to our
problem this is the sum of the fifth
powers and we've derived it using the
other elementary symmetric polynomials
and the other power sums this is
incredible now I have a challenge for
you try to solve for the sum of the
sixth powers furthermore prove that the
sum of the nth powers is rational for
every positive integer n thanks for
making mind your decisions one of the
best channels on YouTube as always
thanks for watching and thanks for your
support
[Music]